# Covid_Model
Modelling Covid cases in Australia with a system of differential equations 

Introduction
Australia, being an island, is naturally isolated from other parts of the world. Thus, when COVID-19 made its first appearance in early 2020, Australians were experiencing life as normal when the rest of the world went into strict lockdowns. Their economy was predominantly impacted due to significant drop in tourists due to multiple world-wide travel restrictions. However, as variants of the virus started being introduced and other parts of the world started opening in 2021, combined with a relatively low country-wide vaccination rate, cases in Australia began to spike as a result. The time period under consideration for this project is from March 30th, 2021, to October 31st, 2021, a 220-day period. During this time, and up until present day, Australia has implemented the following basic restrictions: mandatory face masks in high-risk locations, private gatherings limited to 10 people, and public places required social distancing (Storren, 2021). To understand the timeline of COVID-19 in Australia, four key time intervals will be described in further detail. 
During April 2021, there was a terrible outbreak of COVID-19 in India and Australia experienced a small spike in cases (Davey, 2021). In response, Australia implemented a travel ban to India, and within two weeks, this small curve was flattened. A large and exponentially growing spike of cases is seen in mid-June 2021 in response to the introduction of the Delta variant. This resulted in the government implementing another mass lockdown in early July and administering 5 million vaccines (Barret, 2021). Over the course of the next month, highly populated provinces began implementing curfews and a 5km travel limit for essential shopping and exercise (Barret, 2021). The government, unable to get the Delta variant under control, cut international flights by 50% in September 2021, and further extended lockdowns (Economic Times, 2021). Additionally, 10 million vaccines were administered that month, correlating to a small dip in cases at the end of the month. Lastly, another spike in cases occurred during the first two weeks of October, because of in-person celebrations of Freedom Day, where lock-down and face-mask restrictions were lifted (Cassidy, 2021). Currently, the population is over 80% double vaccinated, and the daily active cases are declining (Australian Government, 2021). 

Model
As a preliminary step, the number of active cases per day in Australia were plotted over the given time interval from March 30th, 2021, to October 31st, 2021, to visualize the data. Studies show that on average, one is contagious (infective) for 15.2 days upon testing positive for COVID-19 (Zawn, 2021). As such, the new cases of the last 14 days were used to represent the total active cases per day. Looking at Figure 1, there are two predominate periods of growth in daily active cases. The data was hence split into two waves, with September 28th, 2021, being the last day of the first wave, to capture these periods of high growth. For the model, piecewise functions with time varying parameters were implemented, meaning that each time period will be fit separately. This strategy permits for the data to be fitted in an effective and more accurate manner, than if there was only one fit for the two waves. 
 
Figure 1: Daily active cases in Australia split into two waves.
An SIR model was chosen to model Australia’s COVID-19 outbreak. See Figure 2 for a flow chart of this model. The model is comprised of three ordinary differential equations.
 
(1)           dS/dt= -βSI,           So = S(0)
(2)           dI/dt=βSI- γI,      I¬o = I(0)
(3)           dR/dt= γI,                Ro = R(0)
 
Figure 2: Flow chart of the SIR model.
 
The S category represents the change of susceptible individuals overtime, where susceptible individuals are those at risk of catching the virus. The I category represents the change of infective individuals over time, where infective individuals are those who are spreading the virus. The R category represents the change or removed individuals over time, where removed individuals are those no longer spreading the virus, which could be due to disease related death, recovery, or quarantine. Over time, individuals flow from one category to the next as the virus progresses. Equation (2) will be fit since it is representative of the data, the daily active cases, and it provides insight on the spread of the virus. 

There are up to five parameters in this model, β, γ, and the three initial conditions of each of the term variables: So, I¬o, and Ro. β is the rate of infection and can be further unpacked. The simplest model for the number of times that S meets I is called “mass action”. Mass action was assumed for the model, and can be written as KSI, for some constant K, representing the number of meeting times. However, the virus is not always passed on from I to S each time they meet. So, a parameter ‘p’ needs to be considered, representing the probability that I infects S when they meet. As such, β is thought of as pK. Furthermore, γ is the rate of removal, consisting of the rate of disease-related death, recovery, and quarantine. 1/ γ is the lifetime of the virus, specifically, how long an individual remains infective upon getting the virus. At the beginning of the pandemic So is typically equal to the population of the area in question since no one has caught the virus yet, and hence I¬o and Ro are assumed to equal zero. Note, there is not a birth rate term and not a non-disease death related term. This is because the virus is being modeled in a relatively short timeframe and it was assumed these values would not make a material impact on the model and analysis. 
Three models, each with a different subset of unknown parameters were considered. The two-parameter model fitted β and γ, while keeping the three initial conditions fixed. The 4-parameter model kept γ fixed and fitted β and the three initial conditions. Lastly, the 5-parameter model fitted all five of the parameters, keeping none of them fixed. The following section will describe the fitting process and the results in greater depth. 
Analysis and Data fitting
To reiterate, the two time intervals in question were fit separately for each of the three models mentioned above. To visualize the fits, see Figure 3 for the 2-parameter, 4-paramter and 5-parameter models respectively.
    
Figure 3: Plots of the fitted data with respect to the observed data for the two, four, and five parameter models respectively.

At a glance, the 2-paramter model was the worst fit, meaning the fitted curve deviates considerable from the observed data. The 5-parameter model has the best fit, meaning that the fitted curve falls does not deviate far for the observed data of daily active cases. However, a greater precision in analysis is required. To mathematically analyze the fit of the three models described above, tools such as the AIC and relative probability will be used. AIC is a measure of the “goodness of fit” of a model, where a lower AIC is indicative of a better model. AIC is be modelled by equation (4).
(4)          AIC = nln(SSE/n) + 2P
Where n is the number of observations, SSE is the model error and P is the number of parameters. A low SSE will result in a better AIC, yet the addition of parameters will not raise the SSE, thus risk of overfitting must be taken into consideration. As such, AIC has a built-in component that penalizes models for the occurrence of many predictors. The relative probability is proportional to the probability that a given model in question is the best model. See Figure 4 for a summary of the results and Figure 5 for the plot of the AIC values.
    
Figure 4: Summary tables of the AIC and relative probability for each model in each time interval respectively.
                             
Figure 5: Plot of the AIC values for each time intervals respectively.

The 5-parameter model has the best AIC, since it is the lowest. The relative probability is very low for the 2 and 4-parameter models relative to the 5-parameter model, hence confirming that the differences in AIC to the 5-parameter model (best model) are significant. Yet, the estimate in the 5-parameter model for γ is 0.822 and thus 1/ γ , the lifetime is 1.22 days. There is a tradeoff between having the lowest AIC based on our model and having reasonable parameters that make realistic sense, with respect to the application of the model. Hence, it is clearly shown that based off literature estimates and one’s general knowledge of the COVID-19 virus, that a virus lifetime of approximately 1.2 days is unreasonable and unrealistic. On average, an individual is contagious with the virus for 15.2 days upon testing positive (Zawn, 2021), thus evidently 1.2 days deviates significantly from 15.2 days, ultimately leading to the decision to reject this model and settle on the 4-parameter model, where γ was fixed at 1/15.2. See the Figure 6 which show plots of each wave in of the 4-parameter model that was settled on. A close fit can be observed.
    
Figure 6: Plots of the fitted data with respect to the observed data for the 4-parameter model during each time interval.

From the 4-parameter model, it is seen that the β value is lower in the second wave than the first wave. The two β values are 1.22x10-6 and 7.16x10-7 respectively. β is the rate of infection comprised of constant K, representing the number of interactions between S and I, and p, the probability that I infects S upon their meeting. Thus, a lower β means a lower rate of infection. We believe that this lower β came about because of Australia’s higher vaccination rate. Lockdowns, curfews, and other restrictions were in effect so K stayed the same except when the second wave commenced due to increased gatherings. Hence, this supports that fact that p must have decreased. With more of the population vaccinated, the rate of infection will decrease, meaning, the probability that an infective individual infects a susceptible individual will go down if these individuals are vaccinated. This demonstrates how the public health measures have a direct impact on the spread of COVID-19, specifically, how vaccines are an effective tool to help flatten the curve – the lower β in the second wave is clear evidence in support of this claim.
The curves were also modelled exponentially. The purpose of this exercise was to make predictions based off the model – specifically, to see where the cases would be if no restrictions or public health measures were put into place and the cases continued to follow their exponential growth. For this, since such a short time period is being considered, S can be held constant, and the other  parameters can be clumped into one as seen in equation (5).
(5)            dI/dt=I(βS- γ),   I¬o = I(0)
(6)          log(I(t)) = (βS- γ)t + log(I¬o) = At + log(I¬o)
As such, this equation can be solved as a separable ordinary differential equation, where equation (6) is the solution, and it can be used to model the periods of exponential growth. By taking the log of the daily active cases, we can view A = (βS - 𝛄) from the equation as the slope of the line and log(I0) as the y-intercept. To further investigate, two areas of exponential growth were highlighted, the first in green, and the second in red, in both of our waves respectively, Figure 7 . For reference, the first period of steep exponential growth can be attributed to the introduction of the Delta variant in mid-June 2021. 
                
Figure 7: Plots highlighting areas of exponential growth and predicted daily cases if the exponential growth continued.

A semi-log plot was used to determine the exponential growth rate and R2 value, which is the correlation coefficient was subsequently calculated to determine the strength of the linear relationship. An R2 value of 1 represents a perfect relationship. The first period of growth had R2=0.995 and the second period of growth had R2=0.985, thus both periods have nearly perfect exponential growth, see Figure 8.
               
Figure 8: Plots showing the fitted model with respect to the observed data for both periods of exponential growth respectively and highlighting their R2and percent growth values.

The active cases were increased by 6.3% and 1.7% in the respective periods. Thus, demonstrating that Australia applied stronger and more effective measures during the second spike and was able to keep the situation better under control as evidenced by the far lower rate of increase. From here, predictions were able to be made. The exponential model was extended to predict the active cases if they would have continued to grow at the same rate, see Figure 7. The predictions showed that around 30,000 cases were prevented in the first section, and around 15,000 in the second section, thus a total of 45,000 cases prevented.
Sensitivity can be used as a tool to determine how robust a model is, meaning how sensitive the model is to change. If a small change of input leads to a large change of output, then the model is deemed to be ill-conditioned and sensitive to change, whereas the converse signifies a well-conditioned and robust model. To conduct the analysis, random noise was added to the data set, and the parameters I0 and A = (βS- γ), from the second wave of the exponential model, were estimated. This was repeated for 1000 iterations, namely 1000 bootstraps. The parameter frequency for 1000 bootstraps was calculated with a 95% confidence interval and it was found that most of the values were within one standard deviation of the mean. At that, the standard deviation equaled 0.0012, which is quite small. As such, this means the model is very robust, and hence not sensitive to change. Figure 9 shows the range of parameter estimates and the histogram of parameter frequency for 1000 bootstraps. 
    
Figure 9: Plots of the range of parameter estimates for 1000 bootstraps and the histogram of parameter frequency for 1000 bootstraps with a 95% confidence interval.

Conclusions
COVID-19 is continuously mutating as seen by its multiple variants, where each new variant appears to be more aggressive and deadly than the last. The magnitude of the threat of COVID-19 was not evident to Australia until the spike of variant cases, in particular the Delta variant arose. Australia was slow to get vaccines compared to other countries, and thus they were not prepared when the Delta variant was introduced. The reason for the delayed or initially low country wide vaccination rate can be attributed to Australia’s vaccine problem which comprised of the following elements. First, Australia had difficulty producing mRNA vaccines locally, as the country has a relatively low R&D presence compared to Britain, France, US, etc. Second, it also struggled with sourcing doses, and thus implementing Pfizer later than other parts of the world. Lastly, it was one of the first countries to strike a deal with AstraZeneca, whose vaccine was intended to be their main player in the fight against COVID. However, the blood clot controversy then arose, and vaccine hesitancy climbed.
Despite the low vaccination threshold, Australia had other measures put into place, as mentioned in the introduction, which kept the cases count down initially. However, the stand-alone use of restrictions, lockdowns, and mandates are not sufficient when variants are introduced into the population. They do help, yet, to keep the virus suppressed, these measures must be paired with public vaccination. This can be clearly seen through Australia’s “COVID ZERO” program where they utilized strict restrictions yet their measures were only effective at keeping active cases down in the country until the Delta variant was introduced as seen by the steep exponential growth shown in Figure 6 above (Mao, 2021). The first period of exponential growth that we highlighted occurred right after Delta was first introduced, and 95% of the country’s cases during this time of growth could be attributed to the Delta variant  (Zawn, 2021).
Yet, once the country was able to surpass their vaccine problem, and increased their vaccination rate, the second wave was flattened, and case count went down. There was a country wide vaccination rate of 30% by the end of the first period of exponential growth, and a rate of 60% by the end of the second period of exponential growth, with growth rates of 6.3% and 1.7% respectively, showing the efficacy of the vaccines. Hence, as the country’s vaccination rate increased, the slope of active case growth decreased. The effectiveness of vaccines was also evidenced through the lower β value in the second growth period, showing that the probability of and infective individual infecting a susceptible individual decreases if they are vaccinated. As such, it can be concluded that vaccines are the best tools for fighting the variants. Variants may require a change in public health measures, such as encouraging the population to get vaccinated by implementing vaccine passports, and Australia should be prepared for such changes.

Critical Overview
Given a thorough analysis, we believe our results to be reasonable and trustworthy. The reasons are as follows. We ultimately chose the 4-parameter model to model COVID-19 in Australia during the given time period. Given the 220 data points that were used, from March 30th to October 31st, 2021, and following the ten data points per parameter model rule-of-thumb, we were not at risk of over-fitting the data. Furthermore, we evaluated the “goodness of fit” of the data both visually and using mathematical tools. Visually, looking at the plots of the observed data and the fit, little discrepancy between the two can be observed in both of the time intervals, thus representing a good fit. Mathematically speaking, we also had a reasonable AIC value, which provided credibility to the model chosen. In particular, the AIC was far less than the two-parameter model, and although it was larger than the 5-parameter model, our parameter estimates were reasonable and realistic, as well as being comparable to literature estimates. 
We also have confidence with our model since we were able to draw conclusions about the importance of β and the vaccination rate that were in line with the daily case count and public health restrictions that were put in place in Australia. Namely, we saw the value of β in our model decrease as the vaccination rate increased, thus representing the accuracy of our fitted β parameter. Furthermore, our sensitivity shows that our model is robust, thus rendering our results valid despite any changes of input in our model that may arise.
We decided to use a relatively simple model. This allowed us to make multiple variations of the model and run various manipulations on it, such as a sensitivity analysis and the use piece-wise functions with time-varying parameters. However, a critique can also be placed on the simplicity of the model, in that it takes into consideration fewer elements. We place an emphasis on the analysis of the effect of the vaccination threshold of the population on the number of daily cases over time, yet we do not have a designated equation to model this effect. As such, to improve our model, we could add an additional ordinary differential equation to model the vaccination rate over time and name it dV/dt. Thus, additional vaccination data of the country’s population would be required. In this case, we could continue to only fit the dI/dt equation, yet this equation would have an additional vaccination parameter. Furthermore, two beta values would have to be used, one to represent the rate of infection of vaccinated individuals and the rate of infection of non-vaccinated individuals.




Works Cited

 "Australia's Capital Extends Lockdown for a Second Month until October 15." The Economic Times. September 14, 2021. https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/news/international/world-news/australias-capital-extends-lockdown-until-october-15/articleshow/86191361.cms.
Australian Government Department of Health. "Vaccination Numbers and Statistics." Australian Government Department of Health. December 05, 2021. Accessed December 05, 2021. https://www.health.gov.au/initiatives-and-programs/covid-19-vaccines/numbers-statistics.
Barrett, Jonathan. "Australia Extends Sydney Lockdown as COVID-19 Outbreak Nears 900 Infections." Reuters. July 14, 2021. https://www.reuters.com/world/asia-pacific/sydney-braces-extended-lockdown-covid-19-spreads-2021-07-14/.
Cassidy, Caitlin. "Melbourne Freedom Day: World's Most Locked down City Takes First Cautious Steps to Reopening." The Guardian. October 21, 2021. https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2021/oct/22/melbourne-freedom-day-worlds-most-locked-down-city-takes-first-cautious-steps-to-reopening.
Davey, Melissa. "Australia's India Travel Ban: How Other Countries Are Managing Their Returning Citizens." The Guardian. May 06, 2021.https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2021/may/06/australias-india-travel-ban-how-other-countries-are-managing-their-returning-citizens.
Mao, Frances. "Why Has Australia Switched Tack on Covid Zero?" BBC News. September 03, 2021. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-australia-58406526.
Storren, Rebecca, and Nikki Corrigan. "COVID-19: A Chronology of State and Territory Government Announcements (up until 30 June 2020)." Home – Parliament of Australia. October 23, 2020. https://www.aph.gov.au/About_Parliament/Parliamentary_Departments/Parliamentary_Library/pubs/rp/rp2021/Chronologies/COVID-19StateTerritoryGovernmentAnnouncements.
Villines, Zawn. "How Long Is a Person Contagious with Coronavirus?" Medical News Today. May 5, 2021. https://www.medicalnewstoday.com/articles/how-long-is-a-person-contagious-with-coronavirus.

